For scientific computing,
arrays are really useful data
structures.
A one dimensional array
can represent a vector.
A two dimensional array can
represent a matrix, and so on.
From its inception,
Fortran was intended
as a programming language
for scientific computing.
And hence, it has
very good support
for multi-dimensional arrays.
Arrays are, in fact, first
class citizens in the language.
And there are many features
that are quite useful,
as we will see.
Declaring a vector is
quite straightforward.
We just specify the
type, real in this case,
the attribute
dimension, 3, which
means that we will have an array
with three elements of type
real.
And the name of the array
is going to be vector.
Assigning values to
individual array elements
is quite simply done by index.
So vector brackets
2, parentheses 2,
means the second element
of that particular array.
And we assign the
value 5.7 to it.
Using a value equally simple.
Just vector(2), so the second
element, we multiply that by 2.
And we assign it to the
first element of the vector.
So as opposed to
C, C++, and Python,
Fortran has one base for
its indices of arrays,
rather than zero base as
those other languages.
Printing a vector is also
pretty straightforward.
We can just use the asterisks
formatting specifier.
And print will do the writing.
It will print the three
elements of our array vector.
We can compile and run the code.
And as you can see, all
three elements of that vector
are indeed printed.
It's straightforward to
initialize all elements
to a constant value
just by assigning
a scalar to the array.
And it's also very
easy to add a scalar
to each element of an array just
by using the addition operator,
and very similar, for the
multiplication operator.
So each element of the
vector is multiplied by 2.5.
When we compile
and run the code,
you see that we get
the expected results.
Also the exponentiation
operator works element-wise.
And that might be a
little bit unexpected.
So if you want to compute
the dot product between two
1-dimensional arrays or
two vectors if you want,
you can use the intrinsic
procedure dot_product.
And that, of course, will
just produce a scalar value.
We compile and run the code.
And as you can see, you get
the expected results again.
Arrays can also be
initialized just
as a sequence of values
in square brackets,
and even with an
implied do-loop, which
is, of course,
much easier if you
have large vectors, long arrays.
There are several functions,
intrinsic functions,
which are quite useful
in the context of arrays.
One of them is
the size function.
And that just gives the number
of elements of an array.
But also, the sum
function, which computes,
as you can guess, the sum of
all the elements of a vector.
And there are many more of them.
And it's a good idea to
have a look at documentation
of Fortran's intrinsic procedures
to see what kind of things
you can do using arrays
with intrinsic procedures.
And, again, when we compile
and run the application,
there are no
surprises to be found.
To declare a two
dimensional array.
We just list the type,
which is real in this case.
And then, as an attribute, we
can specify dimension, but now,
with the number of rows and the
number of columns as arguments.
So matrix1 is a
2-dimensional array
with two rows and three
columns, and similar
for matrix2 and matrix3.
To initialize a
2-dimensional array,
we can use implied do loops.
But then we get a one
dimensional array.
And in fact, we need
a 2-dimensional one.
So we can use the intrinsic
function reshape in order
to turn that 1-dimensional array
into a 2-dimensional array.
And we use another
intrinsic function shape,
which will return an array with
the dimensions of the array
in rows and in columns.
To print the array the
two dimensional array,
actually, it's more
convenient to use a do loop
over the number of rows.
And notice that we use the
intrinsic function size
with an optional argument,
in this case 1, which
means the first dimension.
That's the number of
rows of our matrix1
And then, we just use the
asterisks default formatting
to print a single row
of the matrix row i.
And the colon
indicates that we want
to print all the columns
of that particular row.
There is a function matmul,
which does, as you can imagine,
the matrix-matrix multiplication
of two 2-dimensional arrays.
And of course, the
dimensions should match just
like in mathematics.
We can compile and
execute a code,
and as you can see,
again, not many surprises.
Note, however, that if we just
apply a size function to a two
dimensional array, we
get a number of elements.
If we add an additional optional
argument, for instance, 1,
we get the number of rows.
If we add 2 as
optional argument,
we get the number of columns.
Fortran supports operations
on arrays, for instance,
you can just add two arrays.
And that means element wise
addition of the array elements.
And the same applies to
multiplication, division,
and subtraction.
Of course, the dimensions
of the matrices must match.
Otherwise, you will get
a compilation error,
as you will see in a minute.
When we compile the code,
you see, that indeed,
we get an error.
So the shapes for the operands
of the addition operator
do not match.
And so basically, we know
that we made a mistake.
And indeed, if you look at the
definition of matrix1 it is a 2
by 3 array, while matrix2
is a 3 by 2 array.
So we cannot meaningfully
add those two arrays.
Support for
multidimensional arrays
makes Fortran a really powerful
and convenient language
for scientific computing.